QTM v1.45 Source code information                 © Steve Harrison, 1993-2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

This file **briefly** details the content of the QTM v1.45 source code files.

To assemble the current release version of the QTM module, just run the file
'Assemble'. This will assemble the code and check whether or not it matches
the current release version of QTM by running a 32bit CRC check on the
output. Feel free to edit and experiment with changes to the QTM code. If you
do make adjustments, the assemebler code will add a 'c' at the end of the
version number, to signify a 'custom' version has been created.

The source code should assemble with no problems on all computers with
running RISC OS 3.1 or later. The assembled module itself will work fine on
all versions of RISC OS, from Arthur 0.30 to 32-bit RISC OS 5.

Most of the source code contains comments throughout the assembler code,
detailing what each part does. Where comments are missing, you might find it
useful to refer to the QTM_Data file, which has exhaustive comments on what
parts of QTM's memory hold which variables, and what they do.

The source files are laid out as follows:

 Filename     Type    Description

 Assemble   - Obey  - Sets the OS variable <QTMCompile$Dir> and runs QTMv1.45

 Copyright  - Text  - Remember, the source code is © Steve Harrison 1993-2013

 LOGdata    - Data  - Conversion table for 8-bit log to 8-bit linear samples
                      (as a file because it's slow to build on old comps)

 LOGtable   - BASIC - Builds 'LOGdata' table, note this program has remained
                      unchanged since 31st July 1993!

 QTMv1.45   - BASIC - Links together remaining files as 'Libraries' and calls
                      procedures to set up tables/defaults then assemble code

 QTM_Data   - BASIC - This file sets the layout of all variables used in QTM,
                      and contains details of what each variable does/when

 QTM_DMA    - BASIC - Contains all code used during the SoundDMA interrupts,
                      to take the sample data, volume/pitch scale, and output

 QTM_Mod    - BASIC - Module shell code, all headers/entry points for QTM
                      module are here, along with most SWI routines

 QTM_Play   - BASIC - The heart of QTM, the optimised Protracker play routine
                      called on the 100Hz int. - interprets/plays the music!

 QTM_Song   - BASIC - Initialise song/sample conversion routines for
                      Protracker songs once loaded (inc. 'Author detector')

 QTM_Timer  - BASIC - The code for SWI QTM_ReadPlayingTime, which rapidly
                      scans the whole song data to work out how long it lasts

 QTM_VUcode - BASIC - The code for SWI QTM_VUBarControl/QTM_ReadVULevels, the
                      VU bar system of QTM. Also contains QTM_DMABuffer code.

 ResetSound - Obey  - Useful when editing the DMA section of QTM, and the
                      RISC OS sound system crashes!

 SourceInfo - Text  - This file

 TextComprs - BASIC - A nifty routine to compress module help syntax/text to
                      make use of the OS_PrettyPrint known words

That's it, if you decide to alter the code and get stuck somewhere where you
really can't work out what I've done, drop me an email (see 'Contacts' file),
and I'll try to remember for you...!
                                                   Steve Harrison, 22/12/2013