xmms-tfmx, by David Le Corfec <dlecorfec@users.sourceforge.net>

Installation:
./configure; make; sudo make install

Hint:
In the xmms FileInfo dialog for TFMX tunes, you have buttons
for the prev/next subsongs.

History:
v0.1 (6-Mar-2000)
 First release

v0.2 (27-Mar-2000)
 Applied tfmxplay interpolation patch from <duh, forgot the name>.
 Added About and Configure dialogs (though incomplete).

v0.3 (07-Nov-2000)
 Bumped revision nmuber :)
 New hosting on sourceforge
 Corrected the "usual" ip_get_song_info() bug (crash in xmms 1.2.3
 because title_real and len_real are not initialized to default values
 before being passed to the plugin, and assumes the plugin will do so)
 (Always consider plugins as harmful entities ! Don't rely on them !)
 Humm ?

v0.4 (20-Jul-2003)
 Thanks to Clemens Buchmann for pointing out that the newlines in
strings didnt compile with recent gcc.

v0.5 (31-Oct-2003)
 Applied patch from Kristof Koehler. It brings new options to the
configuration dialog and allows to save settings. Thanks !

--

This is a plugin for the Unix soundplayer XMMS (www.xmms.org).
It replays the TFMX format, created by Chris Huelsbeck in the late 80's.
Used in the Amiga games Turrican 1/2/3, X-Out, Z-Out, Apydia,
and many others ...

This plugin is based upon code (Winamp plugin) by
Per Lindén <per@snakebite.com>, in turn based upon code
(free TFMX replayer) by Jonathan H. Pickard.

I didn't do anything to improve the readability of the code,
so read it at your own risks :)
I didn't either improve the replayer, because TFMX is really a strange
format, and I'm not a natural born replay coder.

Congratulations to Huelsbeck, Pickard, BlackBird and Cyb
(those 2 did the EaglePlayer plugin), these are the only people
I know who worked on the inner parts of a TFMX player :)

Features:
* Support most TFMX Pro/7V/1.5 tunes
* Support either mdat + smpl, or single TFMX files produced
  by Cyb' TFMXConverter.
* Support SQSH decrunching on single TFMX file (because TFMX tunes on
  my Amiga hard disk were squashed :)
* FileInfo Dialog, with Prev/Next Subsong buttons (useful :)
* About dialog
* Configure dialog

As a feature (or bug), currently each subsong is played only once
before jumping to the next one. A prefs panel should
allow you to loop on subsongs.

Enjoy those great TFMX tunes ! (my favorite being Turrican-II Title)

Chris Huelsbeck is now working in the USA, and he has a site:
www.huelsbeck.com

rant: If xmms was clever app (in future versions perhaps) it would have
an unpacking engine, a channel mixer, a prev/next song/pattern board,
or anything that would improve plugin's quality while removing some
burden from the plugin programmer. EaglePlayer II forever.
(unfortunately it's been already 5 years - started in 1998 - that I plan
to make a proper modular player for Unix, but it seems that Unix sucks
 - or is it just me ? :)


Copyrights :

My own code is Public Domain (though there isn't a clear limit
between my code and jhp/pl code in some files, I like to wander
everywhere to add "static" keywords and other minor changes ...)
OK, I admit, I messed up the whole thing by trying to give
meaningful names to the variables. But it was an attempt at improving
clarity ! :)

This XMMS plugin is heavily based on existing sources ...

1) tfmx-play

 See tfmxplay.txt

2) TFMXPlug

 See tfmxplugreadme.txt

